#############
Version 4.7.1
#############

Release Date: March 22, 2026

**4.7.1 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

********
BREAKING
********

- **Database:** ``CodeIgniter\Database\SQLite3\Connection::$busyTimeout`` is now typed as ``?int``. Custom subclasses that redeclare this property will need to be updated.

***************
Message Changes
***************

- Updated ``Images.unsupportedImageCreate``.
- Renamed the ``Validation.valid_cc_num`` key to ``Validation.valid_cc_number``.

*******
Changes
*******

Events
======

- **Worker Mode:** :php:func:`Events::cleanupForWorkerMode()` now accepts an optional
  ``$resetEventListeners`` array parameter, corresponding to the new
  ``$resetEventListeners`` property in ``Config\WorkerMode``. This allows users to
  declare event names that should be cleaned up between requests when listeners are
  registered inside event callbacks. See :ref:`worker-mode-reset-event-listeners`.

Others
======

- **builds:** In the ``builds`` script (for ``codeigniter4/appstarter``), the ``next`` argument has been added
  to switch ``4.7.x`` to the next minor version ``4.8.x-dev``. See :ref:`Latest Dev<switch-to-dev-version>`.

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

- **ContentSecurityPolicy:** Fixed a bug where custom CSP tags were not removed from generated HTML when CSP was disabled. The method now ensures that all custom CSP tags are removed from the generated HTML.
- **ContentSecurityPolicy:** Fixed a bug where ``generateNonces()`` produces corrupted JSON responses by replacing CSP nonce placeholders with unescaped double quotes. The method now automatically JSON-escapes nonce attributes when the response Content-Type is JSON.
- **ContentSecurityPolicy:** Fixed a bug where nonces generated by ``getScriptNonce()`` and ``getStyleNonce()`` were not added to the ``script-src-elem`` and ``style-src-elem`` directives, causing nonces to be silently ignored by browsers when those directives were present.
- **CURLRequest:** Fixed a bug where HTTP/2 responses without a reason phrase (e.g., ``HTTP/2 200``) were not parsed correctly, causing the status code and protocol version to be ignored.
- **Database:** Fixed a bug where ``BaseConnection::callFunction()`` could double-prefix already-prefixed function names.
- **Database:** Fixed a bug where ``BasePreparedQuery::prepare()`` could mis-handle SQL containing colon syntax by over-broad named-placeholder replacement. It now preserves PostgreSQL cast syntax like ``::timestamp``.
- **Database:** Fixed a bug where string values from config arrays (including ``.env`` overrides) were not normalized for typed connection properties, which could cause SQLite3 options like ``synchronous`` and ``busyTimeout`` to be assigned with the wrong type.
- **Model:** Fixed a bug where ``BaseModel::updateBatch()`` threw an exception when ``updateOnlyChanged`` was ``true`` and the index field value did not change.
- **Model:** Fixed a bug where ``Model::chunk()`` ran an unnecessary extra database query at the end of iteration. ``chunk()`` now also throws ``InvalidArgumentException`` when called with a non-positive chunk size.
- **Session:** Fixed a bug in ``MemcachedHandler`` where the constructor incorrectly threw an exception when ``savePath`` was not empty.
- **Testing:** Fixed a bug in ``FeatureTestTrait::withRoutes()`` where invalid HTTP methods were not properly validated, thus passing them all to ``RouteCollection``.
- **Toolbar:** Fixed a bug where the standalone toolbar page loaded from ``?debugbar_time=...`` was not interactive.
- **Toolbar:** Fixed a bug in the Routes panel where only the first route parameter was converted to an input field on hover.
- **Validation:** Rule ``valid_cc_number`` now has the correct translation.
- **Validation:** Fixed a bug where rules did not fire for array elements missing a key when using wildcard fields (e.g., ``contacts.friends.*.name``).
- **View:** Fixed a bug where ``View`` would throw an error if the ``appOverridesFolder`` config property was not defined.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
