#############
Version 4.7.3
#############

Release Date: Unreleased

**4.7.3 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

********
BREAKING
********

***************
Message Changes
***************

- The ``Cache.invalidHandler`` message string was added.

*******
Changes
*******

- **Commands:** The ``-h`` option for the ``routes`` command is renamed to ``--sort-by-handler`` to avoid conflict with the common use of ``-h`` as a shortcut for ``--help``.
  The old ``-h`` option will continue to work until v4.8.0, at which point it will be removed and repurposed as a shortcut for ``--help``.
  A warning message is displayed when using the old ``-h`` option to encourage users to switch to the new ``--sort-by-handler`` option.

************
Deprecations
************

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

- **Autoloader:** Fixed a bug where ``Autoloader::unregister()`` (used during tests) silently failed to remove handlers from the SPL autoload stack, causing closures to accumulate permanently.
- **CLI:** Fixed a bug where ``CLI::generateDimensions()`` leaked ``stty`` error output (e.g., ``stty: 'standard input': Inappropriate ioctl for device``) to stderr when stdin was not a TTY.
- **Commands:** Fixed a bug in the ``env`` command where passing options only would cause the command to throw a ``TypeError`` instead of showing the current environment.
- **Common:** Fixed a bug where the ``command()`` helper function did not properly clean up output buffers, which could lead to risky tests when exceptions were thrown.
- **Kint:** Fixed a bug where stale Content Security Policy nonces were reused in worker mode, causing browser CSP violations for Debug Toolbar assets.
- **Validation:** Fixed a bug where ``Validation::getValidated()`` dropped fields whose validated value was explicitly ``null``.

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
