#############
Version 4.8.0
#############

Release Date: Unreleased

**4.8.0 release of CodeIgniter4**

.. contents::
    :local:
    :depth: 3

**********
Highlights
**********

- TBD

********
BREAKING
********

Behavior Changes
================

- The static ``Boot::initializeConsole()`` method no longer handles the display of the console header. This is now handled within ``Console::run()``.
  If you have overridden ``Boot::initializeConsole()``, you should remove any code related to displaying the console header, as this is now the responsibility of the ``Console`` class.
- **Commands:** The ``-h`` option to ``routes`` command which was mapped previously to the ``--sort-by-handler`` option is now removed.
  Use ``--sort-by-handler`` instead to sort the routes by handler when running the ``routes`` command.
- **Commands:** The ``filter:check`` command now requires the HTTP method argument to be uppercase (e.g., ``spark filter:check GET /`` instead of ``spark filter:check get /``).
- **Commands:** Several built-in commands have been migrated from ``BaseCommand`` to the modern ``AbstractCommand`` style. Applications that extend a built-in command to override
  behaviour may need to re-implement against the modern API (``configure()`` + ``execute()`` and the ``#[Command]`` attribute) once the class it extends is migrated, or, preferably, compose instead of extending. Invocations on the command line are unaffected.
- **Database:** The Postgre driver's ``$db->error()['code']`` previously always returned ``''``. It now returns the 5-character SQLSTATE string for query and transaction failures (e.g., ``'42P01'``), or ``'08006'`` for connection-level failures. Code that relied on ``$db->error()['code'] === ''`` will need updating.
- **Filters:** HTTP method matching for method-based filters is now case-sensitive. The keys in ``Config\Filters::$methods`` must exactly match the request method
  (e.g., ``GET``, ``POST``). Lowercase method names (e.g., ``post``) will no longer match.
- **Testing:** Tests using the ``FeatureTestTrait`` must now use uppercase HTTP method names when performing a request when using the ``call()`` method directly
  (e.g., ``$this->call('GET', '/path')`` instead of ``$this->call('get', '/path')``). Additionally, setting method-based routes using ``withRoutes()`` must
  also use uppercase method names (e.g., ``$this->withRoutes([['GET', 'home', 'Home::index']])``).

Interface Changes
=================

**NOTE:** If you've implemented your own classes that implement these interfaces from scratch, you will need to
update your implementations to include the new methods or method changes to ensure compatibility.

- **Database:** ``CodeIgniter\Database\ConnectionInterface`` now requires the ``afterCommit()``, ``afterRollback()``, ``inTransaction()``, and ``transaction()`` methods.
- **Logging:** ``CodeIgniter\Log\Handlers\HandlerInterface::handle()`` now requires a third parameter ``array $context = []``. Any custom log handler that overrides ``handle()`` - whether implementing ``HandlerInterface`` directly or extending a built-in handler class - must add the parameter to its ``handle()`` method signature.
- **Security:** The ``SecurityInterface``'s ``verify()`` method now has a native return type of ``static``.

Method Signature Changes
========================

- **CLI:** The ``Console::run()`` method now accepts an optional ``array $tokens`` parameter. This allows you to pass an array of command tokens directly to the console runner, which is useful for testing or programmatically running commands. If not provided, it will default to using the global ``$argv``.
- **CodeIgniter:** The deprecated parameters in methods have been removed:
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::handleRequest()`` no longer accepts the deprecated ``$cacheConfig`` and ``$returnResponse`` parameters.
        - ``$cacheConfig`` is no longer used and is now hard deprecated. A deprecation notice will be triggered if this is passed to the method.
        - ``$returnResponse`` is now removed since already deprecated and unused.
        - The updated method signature is now ``handleRequest(?RouteCollectionInterface $routes, ?Cache $cacheConfig = null)``.
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::gatherOutput()`` no longer accepts the deprecated ``$cacheConfig`` parameter.
      As this is the first parameter, custom uses of this method will need to be updated to remove the parameter.
- **Config:** ``CodeIgniter\Config\Services::request()`` no longer accepts any parameter.
- **Database:** The following methods have had their signatures updated to remove deprecated parameters:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\Forge::_createTable()`` no longer accepts the deprecated ``$ifNotExists`` parameter. The method signature is now ``_createTable(string $table, array $attributes)``.

Property Scope Changes
======================

- **HTTP:** The following properties have changed their scope (visibility):
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\RequestTrait::$ipAddress`` is now private (previously protected).

Method Scope Changes
====================

- **HTTP:** The following methods have changed their scope (visibility):
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\URI::setUri()`` is now private (previously public).
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\URI::refreshPath()`` is now protected (previously public).
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\SiteURI::refreshPath()`` is now protected (previously public).

Removed Deprecated Items
========================

- **Autoloader:** Removed the following deprecated methods:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Autoloader\Autoloader::sanitizeFileName()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Autoloader\Autoloader::discoverComposerNamespaces()``
- **Bootstrap:** The deprecated **system/bootstrap.php** file has been removed.
- **Cache:** Removed the following deprecated methods and constant:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Cache\Handlers\BaseHandler::RESERVED_CHARACTERS`` (deprecated since v4.1.5)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Cache\Handlers\FileHandler::writeFile()`` (deprecated since v4.6.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Cache\Handlers\FileHandler::deleteFile()`` (deprecated since v4.6.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Cache\Handlers\FileHandler::getDirFileInfo()`` (deprecated since v4.6.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Cache\Handlers\FileHandler::getFileInfo()`` (deprecated since v4.6.0)
- **CLI:** Removed the following properties and methods deprecated:
    - ``CodeIgniter\CLI\BaseCommand::getPad()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CLI\CLI::$readline_support``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CLI\CLI::$wait_msg``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CLI\CLI::isWindows()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CLI\GeneratorTrait::execute()``
- **CodeIgniter:** Removed the following properties and methods deprecated:
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::$cacheTTL``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::$returnResponse``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::initializeKint()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::detectEnvironment()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::bootstrapEnvironment()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::forceSecureAccess()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::displayCache()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::cache()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::cachePage()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::generateCacheName()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::displayPerformanceMetrics()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::determinePath()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\CodeIgniter::callExit()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Test\MockCodeIgniter::callExit()``
- **Config:** Removed the following property deprecated:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Config\BaseService::$services`` (deprecated since v4.5.0)
- **Database:** Removed the following properties and methods deprecated:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\BaseBuilder::setInsertBatch()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\BaseBuilder::setUpdateBatch()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\BaseBuilder::cleanClone()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\BaseConnection::$strictOn``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\Forge::$createTableIfStr``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\Seeder::$faker``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\Seeder::faker()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\OCI8\Forge::$createTableIfStr``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\OCI8\Forge::getError()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Database\SQLSRV\Forge::$createTableIfStr``
- **Debug:** Removed the following deprecated properties and methods:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Toolbar\Collectors\BaseCollector::cleanPath()`` (deprecated since v4.2.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::$ob_level`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::$viewPath`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::determineView()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::render()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::collectVars()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::maskSensitiveData()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::maskData()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::cleanPath()`` (deprecated since v4.2.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::describeMemory()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Debug\Exceptions::highlightFile()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
- **Exceptions:** Removed the following static constructors of ``FrameworkException`` and its child classes:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\DownloadException::forCannotSetCache()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Exceptions\FrameworkException::forMissingExtension()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Honeypot\Exceptions\HoneypotException::forNoHiddenValue()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\Exceptions\HTTPException::forInvalidSameSiteSetting()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Exceptions\SecurityException::forInvalidSameSite()``
    - ``CodeIgniter\Session\Exceptions\SessionException::forInvalidSameSiteSetting()``
- **Filters:** Removed the following properties and methods deprecated:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Filters\Filters::$arguments`` (deprecated since v4.6.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Filters\Filters::$argumentsClass`` (deprecated since v4.6.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Filters\Filters::getArguments()`` (deprecated since v4.6.0)
- **HTTP:** Removed the following properties and methods deprecated:
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\Message::getHeaders()`` (deprecated since v4.0.5)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\Message::getHeader()`` (deprecated since v4.0.5)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\RequestTrait::getEnv()`` (deprecated since v4.4.4)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\URI::$uriString`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\URI::$baseURL`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\URI::setBaseURL()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\URI::getBaseURL()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\URI::setScheme()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\SiteURI::$segments`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\SiteURI::setBaseURL()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\HTTP\SiteURI::setURI()`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
- **Security:** Removed the following properties and methods deprecated:
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\SecurityInterface::sanitizeFilename()`` (deprecated since v4.6.2)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::sanitizeFilename()`` (deprecated since v4.6.2)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$csrfProtection`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$tokenRandomize`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$tokenName`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$headerName`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$expires`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$regenerate`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$redirect`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)
    - ``CodeIgniter\Security\Security::$sameSite`` (deprecated since v4.4.0)

************
Enhancements
************

Commands
========

- Added a new attribute-based command style built on :php:class:`AbstractCommand <CodeIgniter\\CLI\\AbstractCommand>` and the ``#[Command]`` attribute,
  with ``configure()`` / ``initialize()`` / ``interact()`` / ``execute()`` hooks and typed ``Argument`` / ``Option`` definitions.
  The legacy ``BaseCommand`` style continues to work. See :doc:`../cli/cli_modern_commands`.
- Every modern command now ships with a ``--no-interaction`` / ``-N`` flag that skips the ``interact()`` hook, plus public
  ``isInteractive()`` / ``setInteractive()`` methods on ``AbstractCommand``. ``isInteractive()`` also auto-detects piped or
  CI environments by probing STDIN for a TTY, and the state cascades to sub-commands invoked via ``$this->call(...)``.
  See :ref:`non-interactive-mode`.
- You can now retrieve the last executed command in the console using the new ``Console::getCommand()`` method. This is useful for logging, debugging, or any situation where you need to know which command was run.
- ``CLI`` now supports the ``--`` separator to mean that what follows are arguments, not options. This allows you to have arguments that start with ``-`` without them being treated as options.
  For example: ``spark my:command -- --myarg`` will pass ``--myarg`` as an argument instead of an option.
- ``CLI`` now supports options with values specified using an equals sign (e.g., ``--option=value``) in addition to the existing space-separated syntax (e.g., ``--option value``).
  This provides more flexibility in how you can pass options to commands.
- ``CLI`` now supports parsing array options written multiple times (e.g., ``--option=value1 --option=value2``) into an array of values. This allows you to easily pass multiple values for the same option without needing to use a comma-separated string.
  When used with ``CLI::getOption()``, an array option will return its last value (for example, in this case, ``value2``). To retrieve all values for an array option, use ``CLI::getRawOption()``.
- Likewise, the ``command()`` function now also supports the above enhancements for command-line option parsing when using the function to run commands from code.
- Added ``make:request`` generator command to scaffold :ref:`Form Request <form-requests>` classes.

Testing
=======

Database
========

- Added ``afterCommit()`` and ``afterRollback()`` transaction callbacks to database connections. These callbacks run after the outermost transaction commits or rolls back. See :ref:`transactions-transaction-callbacks`.
- Added the ``transaction()`` method to database connections to run a callback inside a transaction. See :ref:`transactions-closure`.
- Added ``inTransaction()`` to database connections to check whether the connection is inside an active CodeIgniter-managed transaction. See :ref:`transactions-checking-transaction-state`.
- Added ``trustServerCertificate`` option to ``SQLSRV`` database connections in ``Config\Database``. Set it to ``true`` to trust the server certificate without CA validation when using encrypted connections.

Query Builder
-------------

- Added ``whereColumn()`` and ``orWhereColumn()`` to compare one column to another column while protecting identifiers by default. See :ref:`query-builder-where-column`.

Forge
-----

Others
------

- Added new ``timezone`` option to connection array in ``Config\Database`` config. This ensures consistent timestamps between model operations and database functions like ``NOW()``. Supported drivers: **MySQLi**, **Postgre**, and **OCI8**. See :ref:`database-config-timezone` for details.
- Added :php:class:`UniqueConstraintViolationException <CodeIgniter\\Database\\Exceptions\\UniqueConstraintViolationException>` which extends ``DatabaseException`` and is thrown on duplicate key (unique constraint) violations across all database drivers. See :ref:`database-unique-constraint-violation`.
- Added ``$db->getLastException()`` which returns the typed exception even when ``DBDebug`` is ``false``. See :ref:`database-get-last-exception`.
- Added ``DatabaseException::getDatabaseCode()`` returning the native driver error code as ``int|string``; ``getCode()`` is constrained to ``int`` by PHP's ``Throwable`` interface and cannot carry string SQLSTATE codes.

Model
=====

- Added new ``chunkRows()`` method to ``CodeIgniter\Model`` for processing large datasets in smaller chunks.
- Added new ``firstOrInsert()`` method to ``CodeIgniter\Model`` that finds the first row matching the given attributes or inserts a new one. See :ref:`model-first-or-insert`.

Libraries
=========

- **Context**: This new feature allows you to easily set and retrieve normal or hidden contextual data for the current request. See :ref:`Context <context>` for details.
- **Images:**: Added support for the AVIF file format.
- **Locks:** Added :doc:`Atomic Locks </libraries/locks>` for owner-aware, cross-process mutual exclusion backed by supported cache handlers: **File**, **Redis**, **Predis**, and **Memcached**. Memcached support has driver-specific release limitations because Memcached has no atomic compare-and-delete command.
- **Logging:** Log handlers now receive the full context array as a third argument to ``handle()``. When ``$logGlobalContext`` is enabled, the CI global context is available under the ``HandlerInterface::GLOBAL_CONTEXT_KEY`` key. Built-in handlers append it to the log output; custom handlers can use it for structured logging.
- **Logging:** Added :ref:`per-call context logging <logging-per-call-context>` with three new ``Config\Logger`` options (``$logContext``, ``$logContextTrace``, ``$logContextUsedKeys``). Per PSR-3, a ``Throwable`` in the ``exception`` context key is automatically normalized to a meaningful array. All options default to ``false``.

Helpers and Functions
=====================

- :doc:`Array Helper </helpers/array_helper>` gained five new dot-path functions:
  :php:func:`dot_array_has()`, :php:func:`dot_array_set()`, :php:func:`dot_array_unset()`,
  :php:func:`dot_array_only()`, and :php:func:`dot_array_except()`.

HTTP
====

- Added :ref:`Form Requests <form-requests>` - a new ``FormRequest`` base class that encapsulates validation rules, custom error messages, and authorization logic for a single HTTP request.
- Added ``SSEResponse`` class for streaming Server-Sent Events (SSE) over HTTP. See :ref:`server-sent-events`.
- ``Response`` and its child classes no longer require ``Config\App`` passed to their constructors.
  Consequently, ``CURLRequest``'s ``$config`` parameter is unused and will be removed in a future release.
- ``Response`` now lazily loads the ``ContentSecurityPolicy``, ``Cookie``, and ``CookieStore`` classes only when used,
  instead of instantiating them on every request in the constructor. Requests that do not touch CSP or cookies no longer
  incur the cost of loading these classes.
- ``CLIRequest`` now supports the ``--`` separator to mean that what follows are arguments, not options. This allows you to have arguments that start with ``-`` without them being treated as options.
  For example: ``php index.php command -- --myarg`` will pass ``--myarg`` as an argument instead of an option.
- ``CLIRequest`` now supports options with values specified using an equals sign (e.g., ``--option=value``) in addition to the existing space-separated syntax (e.g., ``--option value``).
  This provides more flexibility in how you can pass options to CLI requests.
- Added ``$enableStyleNonce`` and ``$enableScriptNonce`` options to ``Config\App`` to automatically add nonces to control whether to add nonces to style-* and script-* directives in the Content Security Policy (CSP) header when CSP is enabled. See :ref:`csp-control-nonce-generation` for details.
- ``URI`` now accepts an optional boolean second parameter in the constructor, defaulting to ``false``, to control how the query string is parsed in instantiation.
  This is the behavior of ``->useRawQueryString()`` brought into the constructor for convenience. Previously, you need to call ``$uri->useRawQueryString(true)->setURI($uri)`` to get this behavior.
  Now you can simply do ``new URI($uri, true)``.
- ``CLIRequest`` now supports parsing array options written multiple times (e.g., ``--option=value1 --option=value2``) into an array of values. This allows you to easily pass multiple values for the same option without needing to use a comma-separated string.
  When used with ``CLIRequest::getOption()``, an array option will return its last value (for example, in this case, ``value2``). To retrieve all values for an array option, use ``CLIRequest::getRawOption()``.

Validation
==========

- Custom rule methods that set an error via the ``&$error`` reference parameter now support the ``{field}``, ``{param}``, and ``{value}`` placeholders, consistent with language-file and ``setRule()``/``setRules()`` error messages.

Others
======

- **Float and Double Casting:** Added support for precision and rounding mode when casting to float or double in entities.
- Float and Double casting now throws ``CastException::forInvalidFloatRoundingMode()`` if an rounding mode other than up, down, even or odd is provided.
- **Environment:** Added ``CodeIgniter\EnvironmentDetector`` class and corresponding ``environment`` service as a mockable wrapper around the ``ENVIRONMENT`` constant.
  Framework internals that previously compared ``ENVIRONMENT`` directly now go through this service, making environment-specific branches reachable in tests via ``Services::injectMock()``. See :ref:`environment-detector-service`.
- **Time:** Added ``Time::between()``, ``Time::min()``, and ``Time::max()`` comparison helpers. See :ref:`between <time-comparing-two-times-between>`, :ref:`min <time-comparing-two-times-min>`, and :ref:`max <time-comparing-two-times-max>`.

***************
Message Changes
***************

- Added new language key:
    - ``Cache.unsupportedLockStore`` (``CacheException::forUnsupportedLockStore()``)

- Removed deprecated language keys tied to removed exception constructors:
    - ``Core.missingExtension`` (``FrameworkException::forMissingExtension()``)
    - ``HTTP.cannotSetCache`` (``DownloadException::forCannotSetCache()``)
    - ``HTTP.disallowedAction``
    - ``HTTP.invalidSameSiteSetting`` (``HTTPException::forInvalidSameSiteSetting()``)
    - ``Security.invalidSameSite`` (``SecurityException::forInvalidSameSite()``)
    - ``Session.invalidSameSiteSetting`` (``SessionException::forInvalidSameSiteSetting()``)

*******
Changes
*******

- **Config:** Added the ``md`` key for ``Config\Mimes::$mimes`` for Markdown files.

************
Deprecations
************

- **CLI:** The ``CLI::parseCommandLine()`` method is now deprecated and will be removed in a future release. The ``CLI`` class now uses the new ``CommandLineParser`` class to handle command-line argument parsing.
- **CLI:** Returning a non-integer exit code from a command is now deprecated and will trigger a deprecation notice. Command methods should return an integer exit code (e.g., ``0`` for success, non-zero for errors) to ensure proper behavior across all platforms.
- **CLI:** ``Commands::run()`` is now deprecated in favor of ``Commands::runLegacy()`` for legacy ``BaseCommand`` commands, and ``Commands::runCommand()`` for modern ``AbstractCommand`` commands.
- **CLI:** The ``$commands`` parameter of ``Commands::verifyCommand()`` and the ``$collection`` parameter of ``Commands::getCommandAlternatives()`` are no longer used. Passing a non-empty array for either will trigger a deprecation notice.
- **HTTP:** The ``CLIRequest::parseCommand()`` method is now deprecated and will be removed in a future release. The ``CLIRequest`` class now uses the new ``CommandLineParser`` class to handle command-line argument parsing.
- **HTTP:** ``URI::setSilent()`` is now hard deprecated. This method was only previously marked as deprecated. It will now trigger a deprecation notice when used.

**********
Bugs Fixed
**********

See the repo's
`CHANGELOG.md <https://github.com/codeigniter4/CodeIgniter4/blob/develop/CHANGELOG.md>`_
for a complete list of bugs fixed.
